# Bibliography

The Bibliography compiles references, texts, and authors cited in the manuscript, the editorial comments, and the glossary.

This bibliography includes detailed references for primary sources cited in the manuscript, however, they may not be the exact edition to which the manuscript refers. They include more widely available editions from prominent publishers in the sixteenth century (Robert and Henri Estienne, the Aldine press, Christophe Plantin, Hieronymus Froben, Johannes Herwagen, etc). Other possible editions can be found in the [Universal Short Title Catalogue](https://www.ustc.ac.uk) and similar resources.

The bibliographic databases are available as [BibTeX](https://www.ctan.org/pkg/bibtex) and html, downloadable from the Project’s [GitHub repository](https://github.com/cu-mkp/m-k-manuscript-data/tree/master/bibliographies).

<br/>

## Manuscript and Editorial Comments

### Primary Sources

Agrippa von Nettesheim, Cornelius. *De occulta philosophia*. Cologne:
Johann Soter, 1533.

Alessandri, Alessandro. *Genialium dierum libri sex, varia ac recondita
eruditione referti, accuratius et majore fide quam antehac usquam
impressi cum duplici indice*. Paris: Jean de Roigny, 1549.

Alexandrinus, Appianus. *Historia Romana*. Venice: Bernhard Maler;
Erhard Ratdolt; Peter Löslein, 1477.

Aphrodisiensis, Alexander. *Problemata*. Venice: Antonius de Strata,
n.d.

Barbaro, Ermolao. *Castigationes Plinianae et Pomponii Melae*. Rome:
Eucharius Silber, 1493.

Barbaro, Iunior, Hermolao, and Hieronymus Wildenberg. *Naturalis
scientiae totius compendium : ex Aristotele, & alijs philosophis*.
Basel: Oporinus, 1548.

Bargeo, Pietro Angelo. *De aucupio liber primus*. Florence: Giunti,
1566.

———. *Petri Angelii ... Cynegetica. Item carminum libri II, eglogae
III*. Lyon: haeredes S. Gryphii, 1561.

Bassus, Cassianus. *Constantini Caesaris selectarum praeceptionum, De
agricultura libri viginti, Iano Cornario medico physico interprete*.
Basel: Hyeronimus Frobenius, 1538.

Belleforest, François de. *Les grandes annales, et histoire générale de
France, de la venue des Francs en Gaule, iusques au regne du roy
très-chrétien Henry III*. Paris: Gabriel Bon, 1579.

Biondo, Flavio. *Historiarum ab inclinatione Romanorum imperii decades*.
Venice: Thomas de Blavis, 1484.

———. *Italia illustrata*. Rome: Johannes Philippus de Lignamine, 1474.

———. *Roma instaurata*. Turin, 1527.

———. *Roma instaurata. De origine et gestis Venetorum. Italia
illustrata*. Verona: Boninus de Boninis, 1482.

———. *Roma triumphans*. Brescia: Vercellensis, Bartholomaeus, 1482.

Boyer, Philibert. *Instruction pour le faict des finances*. Paris:
Ambroise Drouart; Guillaume Le Noir, 1581.

Buchanan, George. *Rerum Scoticarum historia auctore Georgio Buchanano
Scoto*. Edinburgh: Alexander Arbuthnet, 1582.

Budé, Guillaume. *Annotationes in XXIIII pandectarum libros*. Lyon:
Sébastien Gryphe, 1551.

———. *Commentarii linguae Graecae. Accurate recogniti, atque amplius
tertia parte aucti*. Paris: Robert Estienne, 1548.

———. *Epistolai hellēnikai. Epistolae Graecae*. Edited by Guillaume
Plançon. Translated by Antonius Pichonius. Paris: Jean Bienné, 1574.

———. *Libri V de asse, et partib. eius post duas Parisienses
impressiones ab eodem ipso Budaeo castigati, idque authore Io. Grolierio
Lugdunensi christianissimi gallorum copiarum quaestore, cui etiam ob
nostram in eum observantiam a nobis illi dicantur*. Venice: Andrea
Torresano; Aldo Manuzio, 1522.

Caesariensis, Eusebius. *Historia ecclesiastica*. Translated by
Tyrannius Rufinus. Mantua: Johannes Schallus, 1479.

Caesariensis, Procopius. *De rebus Gothorum, Persarum ac Vandalorum
libri VII*. Basel: Johannes Hervagius, 1531.

Cartari, Vincenzo. *Les images des dieux*. Edited by Antoine du Verdier.
Lyon: Guichard Julliéron, 1584.

Commynes, Philippe de. *Cronicque et histoyre*. Paris: François
Regnault; Pierre Gadoul, 1529.

Corrozet, Gilles. *Le Cathalogue des villes et citez assises es troys
Gaulles, avecq ung traicté des fleuves et fontaines, illustré de
nouvelles figures*. Paris: Denis Janot, 1538.

Curtius Rufus, Quintus. *Historiae Alexandri Magni*. Venice: Johannes
Tacuinus, 1496.

Damascenus, Nicolaus, and Johannes Stobaeus. *Ex Nicolai Damasceni
Vniversali Historia Sev De moribus gentium libris excerpta Iohannis
Stobaei*. Edited by Nicolaus Cragius. Geneva: Santandreanus, 1593.

Delorme, Philibert. *Nouvelles inventions pour bien bastir et a petits
fraiz*. Paris: Fédéric Morel, 1561.

Dodoens, Rembert. *Trium priorum de stirpium historia commentariorum
imagines ad vivum expressae una cum indicibus, Graece, Latine,
officinarum, Germanica, Brabantica Gallicaque nomina complectentibus*.
Antwerp: Jan van der Loe, 1553.

Emili, Paolo. *De rebus gestis Gallorum libri IX ad historiam Pauli
Aemylii additi, perducta historia usque ad tempora Henrici II, Francorum
regis*. Translated by Arnoul Le Ferron. Paris: Michel de Vascosan, 1555.

Festus, Sextus Pompeius, and Marcus Verrius Flaccus. *Quae extant. Et
Sex. Pompei Festi De verborum significatione, libri XX. In eundem Festum
annotationes. Index rerum obiter dictarum. Ex bibliotheca Antonii
Augustini*. Venice: Giovanni Maria Bonelli; Giordano Ziletti, 1560.

Firmicus, Julius. *Astronomicon Lib. VIII*. Basel: Johannes Herwagen,
1533.

Foresti, Jacopo Filippo. *Novissime hystoriarum omnium repercussiones
noviter a reverendissimo patre Iacobophilippo Bergomense Ordinis
heremitarum edite: que Supplementum supplementi cronicarum nuncupantur.
Incipiendo ab exordio mundi usque in annum salutis nostre MCCCCCII*.
Venice: Albertino da Lessona, 1503.

———. *Supplementum chronicarum*. Venice: Bernardinus Rizus, 1493.

Frisingensis, Otto, and Benedictus Chelidonius. *Rerun ab origine mundi
ad ipsius usque tempora gestarum, libri octo. Eiusdem de gestis
Friderici primi aenobarbi caes.aug. Libri duo. Radevici phrisingen.
Ecclesie canonici libri duo, prioribus additi, de eiusd Friderici imp.
Gestis*. Strasbourg: Matthias Schürer, 1515.

Frisingensis, Otto, Guntherus Parisiensis, Rahewinus Frisingensis,
Johannes Cuspinianus, and Pierre Pithou. *De eiudem frid. Gestis libri
II de gestis Friderici I. Caes. Aug. Libri duo libri duo de eiusdem
Friderici imp. Gestis ligurini de gestis imp. Caesaris Friderici primi
augusti libri decem ligurinus, sive de gestis Friderici, libri X.
Ottonis episcopi Frisingensis leopoldi pii Marchionis Austriae
f.chronicon, sive rerum ab orbe condito ad sua usque tempora gestarum,
libri octo. Eiusdem de gestis Friderici I.caes.aug.libri duo. Radeuici
Frising.canonici de eiusdem frid. gestis libri II. Priorib.additi.
Guntheri poëtae ligurinus, sive de gestis Friderici, libri X. Addita
sunt et alia, cum ad Friderici, tum ad posteriorum imperatorum historiam
pertinentia, adiectis etiam notis et indice accurato*. Basel: Peter
Perna, 1569.

Froumenteau, Nicolas. *Le secret des finances de France*, 1581.

Gellius, Aulus. *Noctes Atticae*. Paris: Henri Estienne, 1585.

Gembloux, Sigebert de. *Chronicon ab anno 381 ad 1113, cum insertionibus
ex historia Galfridi et additionibus Roberti, abbatis Montis, centum et
tres sequentes annos complectentibus, promovente egregio patre D. G.
Parvo,... nunc primum in lucem emissum*. Paris: Henri Estienne; Jean
Petit, 1513.

Gessner, Conrad. *De omni rerum fossilium genere, gemmis, lapidibus,
metallis, et huiusmodi, libri aliquot, plerique nunc primum editi*.
Zürich: Hans Jakob Geßner, 1566.

Giovio, Paolo. *De Romanis piscibus libellus ad Ludovicum Borbonium
cardinalem amplissimum*. Rome: Francesco Minizio Calvo, 1524.

———. *Descriptio Britanniae, Scotiae, Hyberniae, et Orchadum, ex libro
Pauli Iouii, episcopi Nucer. de imperiis, et gentibus cogniti orbis, cum
eius operis prohoemio*. Venice: Michele Tramezzino, 1548.

———. *Elogia virorum bellica virtute illustrium veris imaginibus
supposita, quae apud Musaeum spectantur. Volumen digestum est in septem
libros*. Florence: Lorenzo Torrentino, 1551.

Guichard, Claude. *Funérailles et diverses manieres d’ensevelir des
Romains, Grecs, et autres nations*. Lyon: Jean de Tournes, 1581.

Halicarnassensis, Dionysius. *Antiquitates Romanae*. Treviso:
Bernardinus Celerius, 1480.

Herodotus. *Herodoti Halicarnassei Historiæ lib. IX. et de vita Homeri
libellus. Illi ex interpretatione L. Vallæ adscripta, hic ex
interpretatione C. Heresbachii: utraque ab H. Stephano recognita. Ex
Ctesia excerptæ historiæ*. Edited by Lorenzo Valla and Henri Estienne.
Paris: Henri Estienne; Ulrich Fugger, 1566.

Hyginus, Gaius Iulius. *Fabularum liber eiusdem poeticon astronomicon,
libri quatuor*. Basel: Johannes Herwagen, 1535.

Irenaeus. *Opus in quinque libros digestum, in quibus mire retegit &
confutat veterum haereseon impias ac por tentosas opiniones, ex
vetustissimorum codicum collatione quantum licuit emendatum opera Des.
Erasmi Roterodami, ac nunc eiusdem opera denuo recognitum, correctis iis
quae prius suffugerant. Additus est index rerum scitu dignarum*. Basel:
Hieronymus Froben; Nikolaus Episcopius, 1534.

Josephus, Flavius. *De antiquitate Judaica. De bello Judaico.* Edited by
Rufinus Aquileiensis and Girolamo Squarciafico. Venice: Johannes Rubeus
Vercellensis, 1486.

*Kompost et kalendrier des bergiers*. Paris: Guy Marchant, 1491.

Livius, Titus. *Historiae Romanae ab urbe condita, libri 15. quotquot ad
nostram aetatem peruenerunt, cum commentariis omnium interpretum ad
explicationem locorum difficilium, e regione insertis*. Paris: Jean
Charron; Michel Sonnius, 1573.

———. *Les décades*. Edited by Blaise de Vigenère, Jean Hamelin, and
Antoine de La Faye. Paris: Jacques du Puys, 1583.

Lugdunensis, Irenaeus, and Nikolaus Episcopius. *Opus in quinque libros
digestum, in quibus mire retegit & confutat veterum haereseon impias ac
por tentosas opiniones, ex vetustissimorum codicum collatione quantum
licuit emendatum opera Des. Erasmi Roterodami, ac nunc eiusdem opera
denuo recognitum, correctis iis quae prius suffugerant. Additus est
index rerum scitu dignarum.* Edited by Erasmus Roterodamus. Basel:
Hieronymus Froben, 1534.

Macrobius, Ambrosius Aurelius Theodosius, and Arnoldus Haldrenius
Vesaliensis. *In somnium Scipionis, libri II. Saturnaliorum, libri VII.
Ex variis, ac vetustissimis codicibus recogniti et aucti*. Lyon:
Sébastien Gryphe, 1556.

Maffaei, Raffaele. *Commentariorum Urbanorum octo et triginta libri*.
Basel: Johannes Frobenius, 1559.

———. *Commentariorum urbanorum octo et triginta libri, cum duplici
eorumdem indice secundum tomos collecto*. Lyon: Sébastien Gryphe, 1552.

Maffei, Raffaele. *Commentariorum urbanorum Raphaelis Volaterrani, octo
et triginta libri, accuratius quam antehac excusi, praemissis eorundem
indicibus secundum tomos ut ab autore conscripti fuerunt: quibus
accessit novus, res ac voces in philologia explicatas demonstrans, quo
superiores editiones carebant hactenus. Item oeconomicus Xenophontis, ab
eodem latio donatus*. Basel: Hieronymus Froben; Nikolaus Episcopius,
1559.

Maggi, Girolamo. *Cinque primi canti della guerra di Fiandra di m.
Gierolamo Magi d’Anghiari al valoroso signor Chiappino Vitelli.
Nuovamente dati in luce (Venezia, Comin da Trino : al segno del
Diamante, 1551)*. Venice: Comin da Trino, 1551.

———. *Variarum lectionum, seu Miscellanorum libri IIII. In quibus multa
auctorum loca emendantur, atque explicantur, & quae ad antiquitatem
cognoscendam pertinent, non pauca afferuntur*. Venice: Giordano Ziletti,
1564.

Maggi, Girolamo, and Giacomo Castriotto. *Della fortificatione delle
città, di m. Girolamo Maggi, e del capitan Iacomo Castriotto, ingegniero
del christianissimo re di Francia, libri III. Ne’ quali, oltra le molte
inventioni di questi autori, si contiene tutto quello di più importanza,
che fino ad hora è stato scritto di questa materia; con infinite cose,
che da molti signori, capitani, & ingegnieri dell’età nostra si sono
havute. Discorso del medesimo Maggi sopra la fortificatione degli
alloggiamenti degli esserciti. Discorso del capitan Francesco
Montemellino sopra la fortificatione del borgo di Roma. Trattato
dell’ordinanze, ò vero battaglie del capitan Giovacchino da Coniano.
Ragionamento del sudetto Castriotto sopra le fortezze della Francia*.
Venice: Borgominieri, Rutilio, 1564.

Magnus, Albertus. *De mineralibus*. Venice: Johannes de Gregoriis;
Gregorius de Gregoriis, 1495.

Manuzio, Paolo. *Antiquitatum Romanarum Paulli Mannuccii liber de
senatu*. Venice: Paolo Manuzio, 1581.

———. *Lettere volgari di M. Paolo Manutio divise in quattro libri*.
Venice: Paolo Manuzio, 1560.

Marcellus, Nonius. *De proprietate sermonum: jam demum innumeris locis
restitutus, multis locupletatus, ope vetustissimorum codicum, &
industria. Additus est in calce libellus de prisco sermone repurgatus:
index vocabulorum De proprietate sermonum: jam demum innumeris locis
restitutus, multis locupletatus, ope vetustissimorum codicum, &
industria. Additus est in calce libellus de prisco sermone repurgatus:
index vocabulorum*. Antwerp: Christophe Plantin, 1565.

Martyr, Justin. *Diui Iustini philosophi ac martyris Opera non ita
pridem Graece edita : nuper uerò Latinè reddita, interprete Sigismundo
Gelenio, quorum tituli pagina operis initio obuersa apparent*. Basel:
Hieronymus Froben; Nikolaus Episcopius, 1555.

Martyr, Justinus. *Opera non ita pridem Graece edita, nuper verò Latinè
reddita*. Basel: Hieronymus Froben; Nikolaus Episcopius, 1555.

———. *Τοῦ ἁγίου Ἰουστίνου φιλοσόφου καὶ μάρτυρος, Ζήνᾳ καὶ Σερήνῳ ;
Λόγος παραινετικὸς πρὸς Ἕλληνας ; Πρὸς Τρύφωνα Ἰουδαῖον διάλογος ;
Ἀπολογία ὑπὲρ χριστιανῶν πρὸς τὴν Ῥωμαίων σύγκλητον ; Ἀπολογία Β’ ὑπὲρ
χριστιανῶν πρὸς Ἀντων ῖνον τὸν Εὐσεβῆ ; Περὶ Θεοῦ μοναρχίας ; Ἔκθεσις
πίστεως περὶ τῆς ὀρθῆς ὁμολογίας, ἤτοι περὶ τῆς ἁγίας καὶ ὁμοουσίου
Τριάδος ; Ἀνατροπὴ δογμάτων τινῶν Ἀριστοτελικῶν ; Ἐρωτήσεις Χριστιανικαὶ
πρὸς τοὺς Ἕλληνας, καὶ ἑλληνικαὶ ἀποκρίσεις, καὶ τῶν αὐτῶν ἀποκρίσεων
ἔλεγχοι ; Ἀποκρίσεις πρὸς τοὺς ὀρθοδόξους περὶ τινῶν ἀναγκαίων ζητημάτων
; Ἐρωτήσεις ἑλληνικαὶ πρὸς τοὺς Χριστιανοὺς περὶ τοῦ ἀσωμάτου, καὶ περὶ
τοῦ Θεοῦ, καὶ περὶ τῆς ἀναστάσεως τῶν νεκρῶν, καὶ πρὸς τὰς αὐτὰς
ἐρωτήσεις ἀποκρίσεις Χριστιανικαί : ex Bibliotheca Regia*. Paris: Robert
Estienne, 1551.

Masius, Andreas. *Josuae imperatoris historia illustrata atq. explicata
ab Andrea Masio*. Antwerp: Christophorus Plantinus, 1574.

Mattioli, Pietro Andrea, and Jean des Moulins. *Commentaires de M.
Pierre André Matthiole médecin sennois, sur les six livres de Ped.
Dioscoride Anazarbeen de la matière médicinale : avec certaines tables
médicinales, tant des qualités & vertus des simples médicamens, que des
remèdes pour toutes maladies, qui peuvent avenir au corps humain, comme
aussi des sentences, mots & matières traictées esdicts commentaires
(\[Reprod.\]) / mis en français sur la dernière édition latine de
l’auteur par M. Jean des Moulins, docteur en médecine*. Lyon: Guillaume
Rouille, 1579.

Maximus, Valerius. *Facta et dicta memorabilia*. Edited by Oliviero
d’Arzignano. Venice: Guglielmus de Cereto, 1491.

Mercuriale, Girolamo. *Liber responsorum et consultationum
medicinalium*. Basel: Konrad von Waldkirch, 1588.

Mesmes, Jean-Pierre de. *La Grammaire Italienne, composée en Françoys*.
Paris: Gilles Corrozet; Étienne Groulleau, 1548.

Nagerel, Jean. *L’histoire et cronique de Normandie*. Rouen: Martin Le
Mégissier, 1581.

Naucratites, Athenaeus. *Deipnosophistou ten polumathestaten pragmateian
nun exesti soi es gnosis elthein*. Venice: Aldo Manuzio; Andrea
Torresano, 1514.

———. *Dipnosophistarum sive Coenae sapientum libri XV*. Edited by Natale
Conti. Venice: Andrea Arrivabene, 1556.

Ollaus, Magnus. *Historiae de gentibus septentrionalibus libri XXII*.
Antwerp: Jean Bellère, 1552.

Orosius, Paulus. *Historiae adversus paganos*. Augsburg: Johannes
Schüssler, 1471.

Palissy, Bernard. *Discours admirables de la nature des eaux et
fontaines, tant naturelles qu’artificielles, des métaux, des sels et
salines, des pierres, des terres, du feu et des émaux*. Paris: Martin le
jeune, 1580.

———. *Recepte veritable par laquelle tous les hommes de la France
pourront apprendre a multiplier et augmenter leurs thresors*. La
Rochelle: Barthélemy Berton, 1564.

Pausanias. *Paysaniu tes hellados periegesis. Hoc est, Pausaniae
accurata Graeciae descriptio*. Frankfurt: Claude de Marne; Johann Aubry;
Andreas Wechel, 1583.

———. *Veteris Graeciae descriptio. Romulus Amasaeus vertit*. Florence:
Lorenzo Torrentino, 1551.

Pollux, Iulius. *Onomasticon*. Basel: Robert Winter, 1541.

———. *Onomasticon. Iulii Pollucis Vocabularium*. Venice: Aldo Manuzio,
1502.

———. *Vocabularium*. Florence: Bernardo Giunta, 1520.

Polybius. *Eklogai peri tōn presveiōn. Ex libris Polybii selecta de
legationibus et alia quae seguenti pagina indicantur nunc primum in
lucem edita*. Antwerp: Christophe Plantin, 1582.

Porzio, Simone. *De coloribus libellus, Latinitate donatus, et
commentariis illustratus una cum praefatione, qua coloris naturam
declarat*. Paris: Michel de Vascosan, 1549.

*Prattica, cioe, Nova invenzione di conteggiare : ridotta à modo tanto
facile, che ogn’uno potrà far ogni gran conto, si in vender, come in
comperare, sia à misura, ò a peso, ò a qual si voglia altro modo, ad
ogni sorte di precio, & moneta, per tutte le parti del mondo : serve
anchora a commutar scudi, & ogni altra sorte di ori in lire, in grossi,
in soldi, e in qual altro modo si vole, & cosi per il contrario : serve
di piu à partir ogni sorte di cosa in piu parti, a far compartite di
compagnie, et in somma à far ogni conto che l’huomo, si possa
imaginare*. Brescia: Sabbio, Vincenzo, 1589.

Redonensis, Marbodus. *Libellus de lapidibus preciosis*. Vienna:
Hieronymus Vietor, 1511.

Ruscelli, Girolamo. *Les secrets de reverend signeur Alexis piémontois
contenans excellens remèdes contre plusieurs maladies vec la manière de
faire distillation tr. de l’italien en françois*. Anvers: Christophe
Plantin, 1557.

———. *Secreti del reverendo donno Alessio Piemontese*. Venice:
Sigismondo Bordogna, 1555.

Sabellico, Marco Antonio. *Le historie vinitiane divise in tre deche con
tre libri della quarta deca*. Translated by Lodovico Dolce. Venice:
Curzio Troiano Navò, 1544.

Sabellicus, Marcus Antonius. *De rerum et artium inventoribus poema*.
Vienna: Hieronymus Vietor, 1521.

———. *Historiae rerum venetarum ab urbe condita, libri XXXIII. Eiusdem
in singulos libros epitomae. Additus in fine est index rerum
memorabilium copiosus*. Basel: Nikolaus Episcopius, 1556.

———. *Rerum Venetarum ab urbe condita in universum opus*. Venice, 1487.

Salviani, Ippolito. *Aquatilium animalium historiae liber primus: cum
eorundem formis, aere excusis*. Rome: Ippolito Salviani, 1554.

Savonne, Pierre de. *Nouvelle instruction d’Arithmétique abrégée propre
à tous les Marchands et Banquiers*. Paris: Nicolas du Chemin, 1563.

Statius, Publius Papinius. *Opera*. Venice: Bartholomaeus de Zanis,
1494.

———. *Sylvarum libri V, Thebaidos libri XII, Achilleidos libri II*.
Lyon: Sébastien Gryphe, 1547.

———. *Sylvarum libri V Achilleidos libri XII Thebaidos libri II
orthographia et flexus dictionum Graecarum omnium apud Statium cum
accentib. et generib. ex variis utriusque linguae authoribus*. Venice:
Aldo Manuzio; Andrea Torresano, 1519.

Strabo. *Peri geographias. Strabo De situ orbis*. Venice: Andrea
Torresano; Aldo Manuzio, 1516.

Suetonius Tranquillus, Gaius, Vulcatius Gallicanus, Aelius Spartianus,
Trabellius Pollio, Flavius Vopiscus, Julius Capitolinus, and Aelius
Lampridius. *Caius Suetonius Tranquillus: Vitae XII Caesarum. Aelius
Spartianus: De vita Hadriani; Julius Capitolinus, Vulcatius Gallicanus,
Aelius Lampridius, Trabellius Pollio and Flavius Vopiscus: De regum ac
imperatorum Romanorum*. Venice: Johannes Rubeus Vercellensis, 1490.

Telesio, Antonio. *Libellus de coloribus. Ubi multa leguntur praeter
aliorum opinionem*. Venice: Bernardino Vitali, 1528.

Ursperg, Burchard of. *Chronicum abbatis urspergensis, a nino rege
assyriorum magno, usque ad Fridericum II.romanorum imperatorem, ex
optimis autoribus recognitum, et innumeris mendis repurgatum*.
Strasbourg: Kraft Müller, 1537.

Verdier, Antoine Du. *Questions enigmatiques, recreatives et propres
pour deviner et y passer le temps aux veillees des longues nuicts, avec
les responses subtiles, et autres propos joyeux*. Lyon: Benoı̂t Rigaud,
1568.

Vergilius, Polydorus. *Anglicae historiae libri Vigintisex*. Basel:
Michael Isengrin, 1546.

———. *De inventoribus rerum*. Venice: Christophorus de Pensis, 1499.

Vergilius Maro, Publius, Maurus Honoratus Servius, Josse Bade, Filippo
Beroaldo, Domizio Calderino, Agostino Dati, Aelius Donatus, Antonio
Mancinelli, and Marcus Valerius Probus. *Vergilius cum commentariis et
figuris P. Vergilii Maronis, Bucolica, Georgica, Aeneis cum Servii
commentariis accuratissime emendatis in quibus multa quae adhuc deerant
sunt adiecta et Graecae dictiones ac verius ubique restituti. Additus
est etiam Probicelebris grammatici in Bucolica & Georgica perutilis
commentariolus recens castigatus. Nec non commentarii Donati, Mancinelli
et Ascensii. Insunt praeterea Beroaldi annotationes et Augustini Dathi
in Aeneidem praefatio. Atque ut studiosis nihil amplius desiderent
adiuncta sunt opuscula omnia sive lusus Vergiliani tum a Domitio
Calderino tum ab Ascensio perspicue declarati. Res vero totius operis
adeo graphice imaginibus exprimuntur ut non minus geri videantur quae
legi possint*. Venice: Gregorio De Gregori; Lucantonio Giunta, 1522.

Vida, Marco Girolamo. *Bucolica de bombyce ad Isabellam Estensem
Marchionissam libri II, etc.* Basel: Johann Walter, 1534.

Viterbo, Giovanni Nanni da. *I cinque libri de le antichita*. Venice:
Baldassare Constantini, 1550.

Vives, Juan Luis. *Los comentarios de Juan Luis Vives a "La ciudad de
Dios" de San Agustı́n*. Edited by Rafael Cabrera Petit. vol. 6. Colección
J.L. Vives. Ajuntament de Valencia, 2000.

<br/>

### Secondary Sources

Bol, Marjolijn. “The emerald and the eye: on sight and light in the artisan's workshop and scholar's study." In, *Perspective as practice: Renaissance cultures of optics*, edited by Sven Dupré, 71–101. Turnhout: Brepols, 2019.

Collin, Franck. “Antonio Telesio de Cosenza, Petit traité des couleurs
latines (De coloribus libellus), éd. Michel Indergand et Christine
Viglino.” Cahiers de recherches médiévales et humanistes, 2010.
<http://journals.openedition.org/crm/12315>.

Corneille, Thomas. *Le grand dictionnaire des arts et des sciences*.
Paris: Veuve de Jean-Baptiste Coignard; Jean-Baptiste Coignard, 1692.
<https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k1280426g>.

Cotgrave, Randle. “A dictionarie of the french and english tongues.”
London: Adam Islip, 1611. <http://www.pbm.com/~lindahl/cotgrave/>.

Daux, Camille. *Histoire de l’Eglise de Montauban*. Paris: Bray et
Retaux, 1881.

Diderot, Denis, and Jean le Rond d’Alembert. *Encyclopédie, ou
dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers*. Vol. 7.
Paris: Briasson, 1770.

“Dictionnaire du Moyen Français.” version 2015 (DMF 2015). ATILF - CNRS & Université de Lorraine Paris, 2015.
<http://www.atilf.fr/dmf>.

Gilson, Etienne. *L’esprit de la philosophie médiévale*. Paris: Vrin,
1969.

Hérold, Michel. “Le verre des vitraux (xve-xvie siècles). Approche
méthodologique.” in *Verre et Fenêtre de l’Antiquité au xviiie siècle,
les Actes du premier colloque international organisé à Paris-La Défense
/ Versailles du 13 au 15 octobre 2005 par l’Association Verre &
Histoire, ont été réalisés et publiés sous la direction de Sophie
Lagabrielle et Michel Philippe*, edited by Sophie Lagabrielle and Michel
Philippe. Association Verre et Histoire, INHA, 2005.
<http://www.verre-histoire.org/colloques/verrefenetre/pages/p307_02_herold.html>.

Lamberini, Daniela. *Il Sanmarino. Giovan Battista Belluzzi architetto
militare e trattatista del cinquecento*. Arte e Archeologia. Studi e
Documenti 30. Florence: Leo S. Olschki, n.d.

Leproux, Guy-Michel. “Quelques éclairages sur la vie et la carrière de
Jean Cousin le jeune.” *Documents d’histoire parisienne* 12 (2011):
23–40.

Michel-Leproux, Guy. *La peinture à paris sous le règne de françois
ier*. Presses de l’Université de Paris Sorbonne, 2001.

Nadolski, Dieter. *Les étains anciens usuels: Leur aspect et leur
fonction pendant six siècles*. Paris: Nouvelles Editions Latines, 1986.

Norri, Juhani. *Dictionary of Medical Vocabulary in English, 1375-1550:
Body Parts, Sicknesses, Instruments, and Medicinal Preparations*.
London: Routledge, 2016.

Roy, Maurice. *Jehan cousin père, sculpteur : La statue de l’amiral
chabot et le jubé de la chapelle de pagny*. Sens: Duchemin, 1909.

Roy, Maurice, and Paul Vitry. *Artistes et monuments de la renaissance
en france. Recherches nouvelles et documents inédits*. Paris: Honoré
Champion, 1929.

Smith, Paul J. “Solitudo: Spaces, places, and times of solitude in late
medieval and early modern cultures.” edited by Enenkel K. A. E. and
Christine Göttler, Vol. 56. Intersections. Leiden: Brill, 2018.
<https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004367432>.

Solmi, Edmondo, and Sergio Solmi. *Scritti vinciani: Le fonti dei
manoscritti di Leonardo da Vinci e altri studi*. Strumenti ; 37.
Firenze: La nuova Italia, 1976.

*TLFi : Trésor de la langue Française informatisé*. Nancy: ATILF - CNRS
& Université de Lorraine, 1994. <http://www.atilf.fr/tlfi>.

Wartelle, André. *Bibliographie historique et critique de saint justin,
philosophe et martyr, 1494-1994 (avec un supplément)*. Paris: Editions
F. Lanore, 2001.

Zerner, Henri. *L’Art de la renaissance en france*. Paris: Flammarion,
1996.

<br/>

## Glossary

Académie française. “Dictionnaire de l’Académie française.” Paris, 2018.
<https://www.dictionnaire-academie.fr>.

Akerman, Susanna. “Paracelsianism in Sweden.” In *Western esotericism in
Scandinavia*, edited by Henrik Bogdan and Olav Hammer, 425–30. Leiden:
Brill, 2016. <https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004325968>.

Analyse et Traitement Informatique de la Langue Française, and Centre
national de la recherche scientifique. “Trésor de la langue francaise
informatisé.” Paris: ATILF : CNRS Éditions., 2019.
<http://atilf.atilf.fr/tlf.htm>.

anonymous. *Secrets concernant les arts et métiers: ouvrage utile, non
seulement aux artistes, mais encore à ceux qui les emploient*. Paris:
Bossange & Compagnie, 1791.

Argonne, Bonaventure d’. *Mélanges d’histoire et de littérature par M.
de Vigneul-Marville (Noël, dit Bonaventure d’Argonne). Quatrième édition
revûë, corrigée et augmentée par M\*\*\* (l’abbé Banier)*. Paris:
Prudhomme, 1713.

ARTFL. “The ARTFL Encyclopédie ARTFL Encyclopédie,” 2019.
<https://encyclopedie.uchicago.edu/>.

Bauderon, Brice, Laurent Catelan, and G Sauvageon. *Pharmacopée de
Bauderon. Augmentée de plusieurs compositions necessaires; & des
facultez de chaque composition. Avec un traité des plus usitez &
celebres medicamens chymiques*. Lyon: Guillaume Chaunod & Cesar
Chappuis, 1681.

Beauchet-Filleau, Eugène Henri Edmond. *Essai sur le patois poitevin, ou
petit glossaire de quelquesuns des mots usités dans le canton de
Chef-Boutonne, etc.* Niort, 1864.

Belon, Pierre. *L’histoire de la nature des oyseaux: avec leurs
descriptions, et naı̈fs portraicts retirez du naturel ; escrite en sept
livres*. Paris: Corrozet, 1555.

Bertrand, Jean-Elie, Christian von Mechel, H Billé, François Noël
Sellier, J. B. F Limozin, and Lacroix. *Descriptions des arts et
métiers*. Neuchâtel: Imprimerie de la Société typographique, n.d.

Biringuccio, Vannoccio. *De la pirotechnia. Libri X*. Venice: Venturino
Ruffinelli\], 1540.

———. *The Pirotechnia of Vannoccio Biringuccio: The Classic Sixteenth
Century : Teatrise on Metals and Metallurgy*. Translated by Martha Teach
Gnudi and Cyril Stanley Smith. New York, NY: Dover Publications, 1990.

Bogdan, Henrik, and Olav Hammer, eds. *Western Esotericism in
Scandinavia*. Leiden: Brill, 2016.

Boodt, Anselmus de. *Le parfaict ioaillier, ou histoire des pierreries*.
Edited by André Toll. Lyon, 1644.

Boucherie, M. A. “Patois de la Saintonge.” *Patois de la Saintonge*,
1845.

Bourne, William. *The Arte of Shooting in Great Ordnaunce*. London:
Thomas Woodcocke, 1687.

Boyer, Abel. *Dictionnaire royal françois-anglois*. Amsterdam, 1727.

Browne, Thomas. *Pseudodoxia Epidemica : Or, Enquiries into Very Many
Received Tenents, and Commonly Presumed Truths*. London: Andrew Crook,
1658.

Buffon, Georges Louis Leclerc. *Histoire naturelle des minéraux*.
Geneva: Chez Sanson & Compagnie, 1790.
<https://doi.org/10.5962/bhl.title.60802>.

Cardano, Gerolamo. *The de Subtilitate of Girolamo Cardano*. Translated
by John M. Forrester. Tempe, AZ: ACMRS, 2013.

Cardano, Girolamo. *Les livres de Hierosme Cardanvs medecin milannois:
intitulez de la subtilité & subtiles inuentions, ensemble les causes
occultes, & raisons d’icelles*. Translated by Richard Le Blanc. Rouen:
Chez La Vefve du Bosc, dans la Court du Palais, 1642.

Cardon, Dominique. *The Dyer’s Handbook Memoirs on Dyeing*. Oxford:
Oxbow Books, 2016.

Carlyle, Leslie. *The Artist’s Assistant: Oil Painting Instruction
Manuals and Handbooks in Britain, 1800-1900, with Reference to Selected
Eighteenth-Century Sources*. London: Archetype Publications, 2001.

Cassignac, Arve. *Dictionnaire occitan de communication:
français-occitan, occitan-français*. Mobileoccitan.com, 2015.

Cellini, Benvenuto. *The Treatises of Benvenuto Cellini on Goldsmithing
and Sculpture*. Whitefish, Montana: Kessinger Publishing, 2010.

Cellini, Benvenuto, and Carlo Milanesi. *I trattati dell’oreficeria e
della scultura di Benvenuto Cellini novamente messi alle stampe secondo
la originale ... dell Codice Marciano*. Florence: Felice Le Monnier,
1857.

Chambers, Ephraim, and Abraham Rees. *The Cyclopaedia, or, Universal
Dictionary of Arts, Sciences, and Literature*. London: Longman, Hurst,
Rees, Orme & Brown, 1819.

*Columbian Cyclopedia*. Buffalo, NY: Garretson, Cox, 1897.

Constans, Germain. *Traité de la Cour des monnoyes et de l’estendue de
sa juridiction*. Sébastien Cramoisy, 1658.

Contant, Paul, and Contant Jacques. *Les Oeuvres de Iacques et Paul
Contant pere et fils...* Poitiers: Par Iulian Thoreau, 1628.
<https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k1519396c>.

Corneille, Thomas (1625-1709) Auteur du texte. *Le dictionnaire des arts
et des sciences*, 1694. <https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k50507s>.

Cotgrave, Randle. “A dictionarie of the french and english tongues.”
London: Adam Islip, 1611. <http://www.pbm.com/~lindahl/cotgrave/>.

Coxe, John Redman. *The Philadelphia Medical Dictionary : Containing a
Concise Explanation of All the Terms Used in Medicine, Surgery,
Pharmacy, Botany, Natural History, Chymistry, and Materia Medica*.
Philadelphia: Thomas Dobson, 1808.

Dalechamps, Jacques, and Jean Des Moulins. *Histoire générale des
plantes: contenant XVIII livres egalement departis en deux tomes*. Lyon:
Philippe Borde, 1653.

Delaulne, Florentin ed. *Dictionnaire universel francois et latin:
contenant la signification et la definition tant des mots de l’une & de
l’autre langue, avec leurs différens usages ; que des Termes propres de
chaque etat & de chaque profession*. Paris, 1721.

“Dictionnaire du Moyen Français.” version 2015 (DMF 2015). ATILF - CNRS & Université de Lorraine Paris, 2015.
<http://www.atilf.fr/dmf>.

Diderot, Denis, and Jean Le Rond d’ Alembert. *Encyclopedie methodique,
ou par ordre de matières: Médecine*. vol. 6. Paris: Panckoucke, 1793.

Diderot, denis, and Jean le Rond d’Alembert. *Encyclopédie, ou
dictionnaire raisonné des sciences, des arts et des métiers, etc.*
Edited by Robert Morrissey and Glenn Roe. University of Chicago:
University of Chicago: ARTFL Encyclopédie Project, 2017.
<http://encyclopedie.uchicago.edu/>.

Dietrich, Philippe-Frédéric. *Description des gı̂tes de minerai, des
forges et des salines des Pyrénées, suivie d’observations sur le fer
mazé et sur les mines des Sards en Poitou,* Paris; Strasbourg: chez
Didot, fils aı̂né, et Cuchet; chez Treuttel, 1786.

Doujat, Jean. *Dictionnaire de la langue toulousaine*. Genève;
Marseille: Slatkine Reprintss, 1974.

Dralet, Étienne-François. *Traité de la pierre à plâtre et de ses
propriétés relatives à l’art des bâtimens, à la culture des prairies
artificielles, des céréales, des prairies naturelles, des arbres
fruitiers et de la vigne: ouvrage où l’on combat, avec l’autorité des
faits, les nombreuses erreurs qui privent l’agriculture d’une partie des
avantages qu’elle peut retirer de ce précieux minéral : Avec recueil
méthodique et analytique des préceptes, maximes, proverbes français et
étrangers relatifs à l’agriculture et au ménage des champs*. Paris: Mme
Huzard, 1837.

Dupuy, Ernest. *Bernard Palissy. L’homme, l’artiste, le savant,
l’écrivain*. Paris: Société française d’imprimerie et de librairie,
1902.

ed., François Muguet. *Instruction generale pour la teinture des
laines*. Paris, 1671.

Estienne, Charles. *L’agriculture et maison rustique*. Rouen: Laurent
Maury, 1658.

Estienne, Charles, Jean Liébault, Gervase Markham, and Richard Surflet.
*Maison Rustique, or, the Countrey Farme*. London: Printed by Adam Jslip
for John Bill, 1616.

Estienne, Robert. *Dictionarium latinogallicum ex hoc latini sermonis
cum gallico idiomate consensum ita percipies ut majores utriusque
linguae scriptores proxime imitari possis ... Editio postrema ...*
Paris: Apud S. Honoratum : Venandantur apud N. Chesneau, 1571.

Favre, Léopold. *Glossaire du Poitou*. Niort: Robin et Favre, 1867.

Félibien, André, and André Félibien. *Des principes de l’architecture,
de la sculpture, de la peinture, et des autres arts qui en dépendent:
Avec une dictionnaire des termes propres à chacun de ces arts.* Paris:
Coignard, 1697.

Féraud, Jean François. *Dictionaire critique de la langue française*.
Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1787.

Fleming, Charles, and J Tibbins. *Royal Dictionary, English and French
and French and English. (Grand Dictionnaire, Français-Anglais et
Anglais-Français)*. Paris: Firmin Didot Bros., Sons & Co., 1870.

Franke, Traugott. *Technologisches wörterbuch in deutscher,
französischer und englischer sprache*. Wiesbaden: Kreidel & Niedner,
1855.

Furetière, Antoine. *Essais d’un dictionaire universel*. Amsterdam:
Henri Desbordes, 1687.

Gacon-Dufour, Marie Armande Jeanne. *Dictionnaire rural raisonné, dans
lequel on trouve le détail des plantes préservatives et curatives des
maladies des bestiaux; par Madam Gacon-Dufour ... tome premier
\[-second\]*. Paris: Léopold Collin, 1808.

Gallo, Agostino, and François de Belleforest. *Secrets de la vraye
agriculture, et honestes plaisirs qu’on reçoit en la mesnagerie des
champs*. Paris: Chesneau, 1572.

Gay, Victor, and Henri Stein. *Glossaire archéologique du Moyen Âge et
de la Renaissance*. Nendeln, Liechtenstein: Kraus Reprint, 1974.

Gettens, Rutherford, and George L Stout. *Painting materials : a short
encyclopedia*. New York, NY: Dover, 2015.

Godefroy, Frédéric, Jean Bonnard, and Amédée Salmon. *Lexique de
l’ancien français*. Paris: Honoré Champion, 1971.

Gourmont, Jérôme de. *Livre de Moresques. Tres utile et necessaire à
tous orfevres, tailleurs, graveurs, paictres, tapissiers, brodeurs,
lingieres, et femmes qui besognent de lesguille*. Paris: Jérôme de
Gourmont, 1546.

Gouvernement du Canada, Travaux publics et Services gouvernementaux
Canada. “TERMIUM Plus,” October 2009.
<http://www.btb.termiumplus.gc.ca/tpv2alpha/alpha-fra.html?lang=fra&i=1&index=alt&codom2nd_wet=1>.

Grandjean, Serge. *L’Orfevrerie du XIX Siecle en Europe*. Paris: Presses
Universitaires de France, 1962.

Guineau, Bernard, Jean Vezin, and Brepols. *Glossaire des matériaux de
la couleur et des termes techniques employés dans les recettes de
couleurs anciennes*. Turnhout: Brepols, 2014.

Handjéri, Alexandre. *Dictionnaire français-arabe-persan et turc:
enrichi d’exemples en langue turque avec des variantes, et de beaucoup
de mots d’arts et de sciences*. Paris: Impr. de l’Univ. Impériale, 1841.

Hardouin-Fugier, Elisabeth, Bernard Berthod, Martine Chaient-Fusaro,
Florence Charpentier-Klein, and Carmille Déprez. *Les etoffes:
Dictionnaire historique*. Paris: Éditions de l’Amateur, 1994.

Hombres, Maximin d’, and Gratien Charvet. *Dictionnaire
languedocien-français, contenant les definitions, radicaux et étymologie
des mots...* Alais: Imprimerie et lithographie A. Brugueirolle, 1884.

Honnorat, S. J. *Dictionnaire Provençal Français, ou dictionnaire de la
langue d’Oc, ancienne et moderne, suivi d’un vocabulaire
Français-Provençal.* Digne, 1846.

Horlogerie, Fondation Haute. “Lexique de l’horlogerie,” n.d.
<https://www.hautehorlogerie.org/fr/encyclopedie/lexique-de-lhorlogerie/s/nielle-ou-niel/>.

Huguet, Edmond. *Dictionnaire de la langue française du seizième
siècle*. Paris, 1925.

Husmann, George C. *Grape Districts and Varieties in the United States*.
Washington, D.C.: U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, 1932.

Jaumann, Herbert. *Diskurse der Gelehrtenkultur in der Frühen Neuzeit:
Ein Handbuch*. De Gruyter, 2011.

Jonain, P. *Dictionnaire du patois saintongeais*. l’auteur (Royan) L.
Clouzot (Niort) Maisonneuve (Paris), 1869.
<http://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k64376415>.

Karpenko, Vladimı́r, and John A. Norris. “Vitriol in the History of
Chemistry.” *Chemické Listy*, no. 96 (2007): 997–1005.

Kirby, Jo, Susie Nash, and Joanna Cannon. *Trade in Artists’ Materials:
Markets and Commerce in Europe to 1700*. London: Courtauld Institute;
National Gallery; Archetype, 2010.

Lactantius, Lucius Caelius Firmianus. *Divinarum Institutionum libri
septem, Fasc. 3. Libri V et VI*. De Gruyter, 2009.

La Curne de Sainte-Palaye, Jean-Baptiste de. *Dictionnaire historique de
l’ancien langage françois ou Glossaire de la langue françoise : depuis
son origine jusqu’au siècle de Louis XIV. Tome 6, ESC-GUY / par La Curne
de Sainte-Palaye,..*, 1875.
<https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k50685v>.

Landolt, Heinrich Mathias Friedrich. *Dictionnaire polyglotte de termes
techniques militaires et de marine*. Leiden: E.J. Brill, 1865.

Landric, Arnauld. *Advertissement et manière d’enter asseurément les
arbres en toute saison de l’année, la vigne sur son sarment, planter
sauvageaux et autres*. Bordeaux: P. Ladime, 1580.

Lanusse, Maxime. *De l’influence du dialecte gascon sur la langue
française: De la fin du XVe siècle à la seconde moitié du XVIIe.*
Geneva: Slatkine, 1977.

Le Héricher, Édouard. *Glossaire étymologique anglo-normand ou l’anglais
ramené à la langue française*. Avranches, 1884.

Lemarchand, Yannick, and R. H Parker. *Accounting in France: Historical
Essays*. New York, NY: Garland, 2015.

Lemery, Nicolas. *Cours de chymie contenant la manière de faire les
opérations qui sont en usage dans la médecine, par une méthode
facile...* Paris: Laurent Charles d’Houry, 1757.

Le Roux, Philibert-Joseph, and Zacharie Chastelain. *Dictionnaire
comique, satyrique, critique, burlesque, libre et proverbial avec une
explication très fidèle de toutes les manières de parler ... qui peuvent
se rencontrer dans les meilleurs auteurs tant anciens que modernes ...
par Philibert-Joseph Le Roux. Nouvelle éd.* Amsterdam: Zacharie
Chastelain, 1750.

Lespinasse, René de. *Les métiers et corporations de la ville de Paris :
XIVe-XVIIIe siècles. Tissus, étoffes, vêtements, cuirs et peaux, métiers
divers*. Paris: Imprimerie nationale, 1897.

Levy, Emil, and Raynouard. *Provenzalisches Supplement-Worterbuch:
Berichtigung und Erganzungen zu Raynouards Lexique roman*. Hildesheim:
G. Olms, 1973.

Littré, Emile, and François Gannaz. “Dictionnaire de la langue
francaise.” Paris: Hachette, 1873. <http://www.littre.org>.

Lucas, Newton Ivory. *Englisch-deutsches und deutsch-englisches
Wörterbuch 1,2, 1,2,* Bremen: Schünemann, 1856.

Magnetus, Jacobus. *Bibliotheca chemica curiosa, seu rerum ad alchemiam
pertinentium thesaurus instructissimus: quo non tantùm artis auriferæ,
... verùm etiam tractatus omnes virorum ... ad quorum omnium
illustrationem additæ sunt quamplurimæ figuræ æneæ. Tomus primus
\[-secundus\]*. Geneva: Chouet; G. de Tournes; Cramer; Perachon; Ritter;
S. de Tournes, 1702.

Mallemans de Sacé, C. *Le secret des secrets de nature extrait, tant du
petit Albert, qu’autres philosophes Hébreux, Grecs, Arabes, Chaldéens,
Latins, etc., etc. Enrichi de plusieurs autres secrets de Cornelius,
Agrippa Merac, Trismegistre, d’Arnaud, de Velleneuve, de Cardan,
d’Alexis Piémontois, et de diverses figures pour l’instruction des
subtilités de la main.* Lille: Librairie ancienne et moderne, 1865.

Markovitch, Tihomir J. *Les industries lainières de Colbert à la
Révolution*. Geneva: Droz, 1976.

Marr, A., R. Garrod, J. R. Marcaida, and R. J. Oosterhoff.
*Logodaedalus: Word Histories of Ingenuity in Early Modern Europe*.
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2019.
<https://books.google.com/books?id=629QtgEACAAJ>.

Ménage, Gilles. *Les origines de la langve françois.* Paris: Avgustin
Covrbé, 1670.

Miège, Guy. *A Dictionary of Barbarous French*. London: Thomas Basset,
1679.

Montesson, Dupain de, Alexandre Jombert, and Pierre Denis Couturier.
*Vocabulaire de guerre, ou recueil des principaux termes de guerre, de
marine, d’artillerie, de fortification, d’attaque & de défense des
places, & de géographie ...* Paris: Couturier et Jombert, 1783.

Moreux, Bernard, and Robert Razou. *Les mots de Toulouse: lexique du
français toulousain*. Toulouse: Presses Univ. du Mirail-Toulouse, 2000.

Museum of Fine Arts, Boston. “CAMEO (conservation and art materials
encyclopedia online),” n.d. <http://cameo.mfa.org>.

Musset, Georges. *Glossaire des patois et des parlers de l’Aunis et de
la Saintonge*. Geneva: Slatkine Reprints, 1977.

Nicot, Jean. *Thresor de la Langue francoyse*. Paris, 1606.

Nicot, Jean, Jacques Crespin, and Girolamo Vittori. *Tesoro de las tres
lenguas, española, francesa y italiana*. Geneva: J.A. et S. de Tournes,
1671.

Norton, Robert. *The Gunner Shewing the Whole Practise of Artillerie*.
London: Printed by A.M. for Humphrey Robinson, 1628.

“OED online.” Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2019.
<http://www.oed.com>.

Office de la langue française, Province du Québec. *Grand dictionnaire
terminologique*. Quebec: Office de la langue française, 2000.

Ogden, Jack. *Diamonds: An Early History of the King of Gems*. New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2018.

Oudin, César. *Tesoro de las dos lenguas Francesa y Española. Thresor
des deux langues Françoise et Espagnolle, etc*. Lyon: Miguel Mayer,
1675.

Palgrave, Robert Harry Inglis. *Dictionary of Political Economy. Volume
1 Volume 1*. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2015.

Palissy, Bernard. *Discours admirables, de la nature des eavx et
fontaines, tant natvrelles qv’artificielles, des metaux, des sels et
salines, des pierres, des terres, du feu et des emaux ... Plus un traité
de la marne ... le tout dressé par dialogues ...* Paris, 1580.

Palsgrave, John. *L’éclaircissement de La Langue Française (1530)*.
Edited by Susan Baddeley. Paris: Honoré Champion, 2003.

Philibert, Monet. *Inuantaire des deus langues, françoise, et latine:
assorti des plus vtiles curiositez de l’vn, & de l’autre idiome*. Lyon:
Veuve Rigaut, 1635.

Pitton de Tournefort, Joseph. *Elemens de botanique*. Paris: Imprimerie
Royale, 1694.

Portères, Roland. *Les appellations des céréales en Afrique*. Paris
Muséum National d’Histoire Naturelle, 1960.

Prévost, Jean. *La Première Partie Des Subtiles et Plaisantes
Inventions, Comprenant Plusieurs Jeux de Récréation et Traicts de
Soupplesse, Par Le Discours Desquels Les Impostures Des Bateleurs Sont
Descouvertes. Composé Par I. Prevost,...* Lyon: Antoine Bastide, 1584.
<https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1b73003635>.

Rabelais, François. *Œuvres de Rabelais*. Edited by Éloi Johanneau.
Paris: Dalibon, 1823.

Ray, John, Salerne, and François Nicolas Martinet. *L’histoire
naturelle, éclaircie dans une de ses parties principales,
l’ornithologie, qui traite des oiseaux de terre, de mer et de riviere,
tant de nos climats que des pays étrangers*. Paris: Ches Debure père,
Librarie, 1767.

Read, Charles, and Lucien Faucou. *L’Intermédiaire des chercheurs et
curieux : Notes and queries français : questions et réponses,
communications diverses à l’usage de tous, littérateurs et gens du
monde, artistes, bibliophiles, archéologues, généalogistes, etc.* vol.
43. 936. Paris, 1901.

Renaudot, Théophraste. *Recueil general des questions traitees dans les
conferences du Bureau d’adresse, sur toutes sortes de matieres*. Paris:
Veuve G. Loyson, 1666.

*Revue critique d’histoire et de littérature*. vol. 1. Paris: Librairie
A. Franck, 1866.

Rézeau, Pierre. *Le "Vocabulaire Poitevin" (1808-1825) de Lubin Mauduyt:
Édition Critique d’après Poitiers, Bibl. Mun., Ms. 837.* Berlin: De
Gruyter, 1994. <http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:101:1-2016073014083>.

Richelet, Pierre. *Dictionnaire francois, contenant les mots et les
choses plusieurs nauvelles remarques sur la langue francoise ...*
Geneva: J.H. Widerhold, 1680.

Roberts, John. *The Compleat Cannoniere: Or the Gunner’s Guide, Etc.*
London: Okes, 1639.

Rolland, Eugène, and Henri Gaidoz. *Faune populaire de la France*.
Paris: Maisonneuve & cie, 1877.

Roquefort, Jean-Baptiste-Bonaventure de. *Glossaire de la langue romane:
rédigé d’après les manuscrits de la Bibliothèque Impériale, et d’après
ce qui a été imprimé de plus complet en ce genre : Contenant
l’étymologie et la signification des mots usités dans les 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, et 16e siècles, avec de nombreux exemples puisés dans les mêmes
sources, et précédé d’un Discours sur l’origine, les progrès et les
variations de la Langue françoise ; Ouvrage utile à ceux qui voudront
consulter ou connoı̂tre les Écrits des premiers Auteurs françois*. Paris:
Warée, 1808.

Rousseau, Abbé. *Glossaire poitevin*. Niort: L. Clouzot, 1869.

Ruland, Martin. *A Lexicon of Alchemy*. London: Watkins Books, 1964.

Sainte-Palaye. *Dictionnaire historique de l’ancien langage françois,
ou, Glossaire de la langue françoise*. Hildesheim: G. Olms, 1972.

Saint-Rémy, Pierre Surirey de. *Memoires d’artillerie receuillis par M.
Pierre Surirey de Saint-Rémy, Lieutenant du Grand-Maı̂tre de l’Artillerie
de France*. 3rd ed. Paris: Rollin fils, 1745.

Sala, Angelo. *Opiologia, ou Traicté concernant le naturel, propriétés,
vraye préparation et seûr usage de l’opium , pour le soulagement de
maints malades qui sont travaillés d’extrêmes douleurs internes*. The
Hague: Hillebrant Iacobssz, 1614.
<https://gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/bpt6k74703b>.

Sauvages, Boissier de. *Dictionnaire languedocien-françois, ou, Choix
des mots languedociens les plus difficiles a rendre en françois:
contenant un recueil des principales fautes que commettent dans la
diction, & dans la prononciation françoise, les habitans des provinces
méridionales du royaume, connus à Paris sous le nom de Gascons : avec un
petit traité de prononciation & de prosodie languedocienne : ouvrage
enrichi dans quelques-uns de ses articles de notes historiques et
grammaticales, et d’obvservations de physique et d’histoire naturelle*.
Nîmes: Michel Gaude, 1756.

Savary des Brûlons, Jacques, and Philémon-Louis Savary. *Dictionnaire
universel de commerce, d’histoire naturelle, et des arts et metiers:
tome I, partie II : contenant les articles du commerce & des
compagnies.* Paris: Veuve Estienne, 1741.

Scheler, Auguste. *Dictionnaire d’étymologie française d’après les
résultats de la science moderne*. Bruxelles: C. Muquardt; Maisonneuve &
compagnie, 1873.

Séguy, Jean. *Atlas linguistique et ethnographique de la Gascogne*.
Paris: Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, 1986.

Shakespeare, William. *Love’s Labour’s Lost*. Edited by Horace Howard
Furness. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincot company, 1906.

Smith, Paul J. “Passer Solitarius: Tribulations of a Lonely Bird in
Poetry and Natural History, from Petrarch to Buffon.” In *Solitudo
spaces, places, and times of solitude in late medieval and early modern
cultures*, edited by Karl A. E Enenkel and Christine Göttler. Leiden:
Brill, 2018. <https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004367432>.

Smith, Thomas. *The Complete Souldier, Containing the Whole Art of
Gunnery with Certaine New and Rare Additions Concerning Fire-Works ...
Set Forth for the Benefite of This Kingdome in These Troublesome Times
of Warre. The Second Edition, Newly Perused and Amended.* London: R.
Dawlman, 1628.

Snyder, Jon R. *Dissimulation and the Culture of Secrecy in Early Modern
Europe*. University of California Press, 2009.

Sonnini, Charles S. *Nouveau dictionnaire d’histoire naturelle,
appliquée aux arts, à l’agriculture, à l’économie rurale et domestique,
à la médecine, etc. 36 36*. Paris: Deterville, 1819.

Stimm, Helmut, and Wolf-Dieter Stempel. *Dictionnaire de l’occitan
médiéval DOM*. Tübingen: Niemeyer, 2009.

Stoll, Rudolph O, and S. Emil Swanbeck. *The Knowledge of Wares: A Book
Designed for Use in Commercial Colleges and Technical Schools, and for
Private Learners*. Eau Claire, WI: R.O. Stoll, 1893.

Stone, Samuel. *Vocabulaire complet français–anglais et
anglais–français*. Paris: Librairie classique élémentaire, 1823.

Taylor, F. Sherwood. “Some Metallurgical Processes of the Early
Sixteenth Century (1530).” *Transactions of the Newcomen Society
Transactions of the Newcomen Society* 29, no. 1 (1953): 93–101.

Tolhausen, Alexandre, and Louis Tolhausen. *Dictionnaire technologique
dans les langues française, anglaise et allemande: renfermant les termes
techniques usités dans les arts et métiers et dans l’industrie en
général*. Leipzig: B. Tauchnitz, 1905.

Trebra, Friedrich Wilhelm Heinrich von, August von Ferdinand, and
Philippe-Frédéric de Dietrich. *Observations de M. de Trébra sur
l’intérieur des montagnes: précédées d’un plan d’une histoire générale
de la minéralogie*. Paris: Didot jeune, 1799.

Vaillant, Sébastien. *Botanicon Parisiense*. Leiden, 1743.

Vaissière, Pierre de, ed. *Histoire Universelle*. vol. 5. Paris:
Librairie Renouard, 1886.

Valmont-Bomare. *Dictionnaire raisonné universel d’histoire naturelle:
contenant l’histoire des animaux, des végétaux et des minéraux, et celle
des corps célestes, des météores, & des autres principaux phénomènes de
la nature ; avec l’histoire et la description des drogues simples tirées
des trois règnes ; et le détail de leurs usages dans la médecine, dans
l’économie domestique & champêtre, & dans les arts & métiers*. Paris:
Lacombe, 1769.

Vasari, G., R. Bettarini, and P. Barocchi. *Le vite de’ più eccellenti
pittori, scultori ed architettori scritte, nelle redazioni del 1550 e
1568*. G.C. Sansoni, 1966.

Vitruvius, Dominique Bertin, Jean Bertrand, René de Daillon du Lude,
Philippe Despont, and Gabriel Buon. *Epitome ou Extrait abrege des dix
livres d’architecture, de Marc Vitruve Pollion: Enrichi des figures &
pourtraits pour l’intelligence du livre. Par Jan Gardet bourbonnois, et
Dominique Bertin parisien. Avecq les annotations sur les plus difficiles
passages de l’auteur, dediées à tresillustre seigneur René de Daillon,
evesque de Lusson, & abbé de Charroux*. Translated by Jean Gardet.
Paris: Gabriel Buon, 1567.

Ward, Gerald W. R. *The Grove Encyclopedia of Materials and Techniques
in Art*. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008.

Whalley, Joanna. “Faded glory: Gemstone simulants and enhancements.”
*Studies in Conservation* 57, no. sup1 (2012): S313–S321.
<https://doi.org/10.1179/2047058412Y.0000000041>.

Wood, James B. *The King’s Army. Warfare, Soldiers and Society During
the Wars of Religion in France, 1562–1576*. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1996.
